The Responses of People to Virtual Humans in an Immersive Virtual Environment

Maia Garau, Mel Slater, David-Paul Pertaub andSharif Razzaque
Posted Online March 13, 2006

Paper researching “impact of behaviour and responsiveness on social responses to 
virtual humans in an immersive virtual environment”

The test employed two physiological measures, Heart Rate and electrodermal activity (EDA)

The research experiment explores if individuals  will start to react to the virtual
people as they would real humans depending on how life like they looked and how “human” they acted 

Core emphasis of creating a sense of “presence” as the researches believe that the closer 
VR becomes to reaching a sense of believable presence( being there), The more valuable Vr will become.

About 10 participants were used for each stage of the experiment (4 stages, kept genders balanced)

“Participants were fitted with Thought Technologies Ltd. ProComp EKG sensors on their torso
and EDA sensors on their nondominant hand (Meehan, 2001). “

Participants were given a “training room” in VR which they began the experiment in and
instructed how the experiment would work. From there the could decide if they wished to continue the experiment.

“In a few moments the doorway will open. Please go through the doorway and you will
find yourself in another room. When you are in there, please observe your surroundings as afterwards we will be 
asking you about what you experienced.” Vague instruction so the participants  could interact with the experiment
without having pre conceived notions of how to react to the VR people. Did this to get uninfluenced results. 


filled out two standardised questionnaires before beginning the experiment: 
POMS (Profile of Mood State) (McNair & Douglas, 1984) and SAD (Social Avoidance and Distress) (Watson & Friend, 1969).
after experiment Participants filled out the POMS questionnaire again. They then filled out a post questionnaire about 
their sense of presence and their responses to the virtual characters

“Physiological data was not available for all participants, because the equipment did not always function correctly“

“The results show that EDA and heart rate was significantly higher when participants were in the richer 
library environment compared to the training room”

Readings from a participant shows  when a virtual agent “talks,” a sharp increase in EDA follows.

“People with higher levels of social anxiety were significantly more likely to avoid disturbing the agents.”

“Our results indicate that participants who encountered the visually responsive agents in Condition
3 experienced a significantly higher sense of personal contact with the agents. This effect diminished 
with experienced computer users. Interestingly, this pattern was precisely reflected in the heartrate data, 
suggesting a parallel between the subjective and objective responses.”


http://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/688/1/688.pdf
